And I did realize that I had come to regard the
Vietnamese as maybe less than human. Maybe not all
the time, but at times. And
I didn't like that myself. And so I think I felt some
of the guilt for that. And maybe that was too much
guilt. But I know it contributed to the way I felt
going home about what I've been a part of. Because I
had seen myself as strictly in the medical nursing
role. And I felt that was necessary and
commendable.
But also, people at home were very much aware of me
live. And I think I did get a question about that. So
I think people looked at me differently. They
looked at all of us. They looked at the uniform, I
think. And saw that whole thing was different,
less honorable than it had been. And how did the
people treat you? Like, people at home? Did
they...
They were glad to have me home. They were? I had
extended three months. I spent 15 months over
there, which was three months longer than the
usual tour. And that had hurt my folks, had worried
them. And my mother, well, she read my letters very
carefully and deciphered my handwriting. My
handwriting didn't look real normal to her. Then I
was, something was wrong. They were real
relieved. What about other veterans? Was there a
problem with being a woman? the woman veteran with
the men veterans? At that time? I'm not sure who I
was around, at least in that first six months, that
was a veteran, other than a friend that I'd had
before going over and while I was over, and then we
saw each other after I was back. I
think everything was fine with us. We didn't have
to talk about it. He knew what I'd gone through. He
had walked through pre-op and recovery once
during a mass cow situation. And I think his
esteem, I mean, I don't think he really
recognized feelings of esteem toward me before
that, but I think he did afterwards.
But others, I don't think I was around any others.
There were guys from my class in high school who
went, but I didn't see any of them during that time.
Then when I went back into the Army, I stayed out. I
got back in December and went back on active duty in
June, I think. Went back to El Paso where I'd been
before. And there were still people there I knew.
One of them was this Jimmy, who had been over with
the weapons project.
And this other friend.
I don't think there was any change in the...
I don't remember any outstanding, any
remarkable,
anything remarkable to say about it. Okay. And I
know you were involved with, talk about the
network of other females who were in Vietnam that
you kept up with. Yeah.
I must have continued writing. I must have written
to some of the girls I had known over there. Because
once I was
living in San Francisco, and that was two years,
probably two years after I was back, I got together
with some of them for the first time. And these, for
the most part, were girls who lived in the same
hooch. It was the Red Cross girl across... across
the hall. Her brother was an MIA, and she had gone
over, had not been in the Red Cross, but had gone
over, had joined, thinking that if she could get
over there, she could find out something about
him. And the gal who lived next to me,
and a couple of others, and those two I've seen
recently, you know, in the last, well, I've talked
to by phone and one of them I've seen. And
I think, you know, we'll continue to see each
other. The one I've supported, well, and it's been
both ways. But when we first really made contact
again, we lost touch for a couple of years. And at
that point, she was going through losing her
father, who was very, very sick. And then soon he
died. And there was some other things going on. And
there was a parallel there. And I was able to help
her in the healing process. Because what I had gone
through had been very recent. She was going
through something, you know, right now. And then
also there was, you know, the stuff in the past. The
same kinds of things that I had done in the past. And
I had started working through that. And so, you
know, there was some sharing.
I've always kept in touch with a girl that I was in
college with who went into the Army Student Nurse
Program the same time I did. And we see each other
every three or four years and write,
talk on the phone. I'd like to know more, you know,
people with the same experiences here.
There are some in the the Dallas area, but I'm not
connected with anyone that I, you know, feel a real
rapport to. And there are times when,
well, there's a lot of times, frankly. I wish more
people had been through what I have been through,
who know what I know. You know, I feel that's a heavy
burden for me.
blessing that more people don't know, but still.
What were your views of the war before you went, and
what were your views after you came home? Before,
I didn't like war, but I saw it as necessary in
certain instances. And I think I felt, like many
people did, that communism had to be contained and
so on and so forth.
For some time after I got back, I didn't think much
about it at all. I was real relieved when it was
over. And it was over in time for my husband not to
have to go. He was a doctor and would have gone.
except he was in training, and his training lasted
longer than the war did. And next I thought, about
the time that was ending and he was finishing his
training, we started our family, and I had a son,
and if I thought of it at all, I thought, well, you
know, that's over. And it was like, that's over,
and there won't be any others. instance
and
when I started I think going started the healing
process myself I realized how bad it was the cost of
the war made much more of an impact than I had before
what happened was I started the healing and the
grieving over the boyfriend over the
relationships.
I was involved more than once, romantically,
while I was there. But either he went, he left, you
know, rotated home, or I did. And it was just over. I
mean, this was not something that could continue.
And I had gone over promising myself, because, you
know, when you're 23, marriage is on your mind.
Mm-hmm. Promising myself that I would not marry
somebody I met over there. I knew this was going to
be an artificial time, and that, um, probably
would not be a good time and place to be making, you
know, a lifetime decision. But still, you just
don't turn off a relationship.
And yet I did. Over and over. Mm-hmm. And, um, this
boyfriend who was killed. I didn't go through his
funeral. When I got over there,
I went to work right away. One of the first nurses I
talked to was someone a little younger than I whose
boyfriend had just been killed while she was in
country. I don't think she was on duty, but he came
through our emergency
room. And she was bearing up. And we thought, well,
you know, my loss wasn't as great as hers. We
weren't engaged.
You know, that was a silly judgment to make, but
that's the way I operated. And then I just, you
know, got busy doing what I had to do. Never broke
down in front of patients. And then at home, you
know, after I get off duty, instead of breaking
down, I go to the officer's club and drink and
dance. I mean, I didn't sit there and, you know,
just drink. We danced and we flirted and we carried
on I mean we just played and played hard but the
energy and the emotion you know was spent counter
to the way it should have been
so when I started working through all this I
started working through the grief of it and cried
like it had just happened
And then realized, you know, the whole thing was
just so wasteful. It was for nothing. And by then it
was being talked about as nothing, or had been for
some time. And was, you know, very angry. Angry at
our government. Very distrustful of
our government. I mean, I don't trust anything the
government says. I really don't. I don't trust
anything I read in the newspaper. I look at it and I
wonder what really happened.
The beginning of this greeting began with a
conversion experience
coupled with the baptism of the Spirit.
Something Catholics don't expect to have happen.
just haven't grown up in that you know but that
tradition hadn't haven't been part of a
charismatic group whatever so it was very
surprising when it happened and it happened as a
healing really a healing gift over something that
had happened in our parish and what had happened
there there were some sudden losses i mean there
was a big big uh turn around in one of the ministries
and people were gone and something was no longer
there that had been there for me. Something
without warning. And it was upsetting me
terribly. And then this happened and it was all
alright. And then a couple months later something
happened which caused me to flash back to start
remembering Vietnam. And I realized what
happened was that healing was just the beginning.
of a healing process that I would go through.
This thing at church, it mirrored what had
happened before. The sudden losses, the losses
with no explanation, no chance to say goodbye. And
so it's feelings that come out that trigger these
flashbacks. And for me, the flashbacks were...
not violent, I had not been through anything that
was violent to my person at least, but I just
started remembering. I remembered, you know,
some of those stories I told you about pre-op and
recovery. I hadn't thought about those in years.
Some of the stuff I hadn't remembered at all. You
know, things just started coming back. And with
all of that, with you know, with this conversion
too, you know, seeing things differently, seeing
things through the eyes of Christ as we should,
then you look at war entirely differently.
You know, I'm very opposed now to that.
There was nothing just about what we were involved
in. There was nothing just about We haven't had a
just war in an awfully long time.
Don't talk just war
to me. I've gotten active in the peace movement,
peace and justice issues.
I just
see things entirely different. You know, I look at
what we're doing in Central America, in many
places, but Central America especially, you
know, it's just totally wrong. It's just a
continuation of all of them. It's just,
you know, people in power, I mean, they change.
Maybe they win. It's good people, but they're...
It corrupts. And then you get a bureaucracy the
size of ours running away. I don't know how people
can stop it. Did you join Vietnam Vets Against the
War? Not that
group. And how have your experiences in Vietnam
affected your life? Like what you do today? What
I'm doing today? Like How do they affect what you do
now? Well, I think that's why I do peace work.
Things have to change. And those who have been a
part of something like this have to speak out. This
business of the boy on the striker frame that I said
reminded me of Jesus on the cross.
The purpose of the cross is so that we will go into
resurrection.
It has no meaning if we don't go into resurrection.
And we don't have to find it out for ourselves like
Jesus did. He had no idea what was going to happen.
He was just plodding along, doing what he thought
he was supposed to do. and not really knowing why.
That man couldn't know what he was, you know,
doing. And it led him to a bad end. But, you know, he
was transformed. He woke up with a big shock. We
don't have to do that. We've got that model in front
of us. We know that these bad things can be turned
around and be transformed. And we have to do them
because, you know, we're Christ on earth. And so I
believe that very strongly, and that's what I'm
doing now. I work...
I helped start a justice and peace committee, an
education committee on justice and peace in our
parish. And I work with an ecumenical women's
group, Church Women United.
They are involved in... women and children's
justice issues. And this is international.
They're active at local, state, national, and
international levels.
And that's exciting to me. Women, I think, will
make a difference. Men are too hurt, too broken up
themselves. They haven't
I haven't seen what they've done in holding women
down in this whole patriarchal tradition we've
been a part of. And women are coming out of that via
the women's movement. And it's a rough time.
There's a lot of animosity among women towards
feminists. But it's just something that has to be
done.
Women are
primary as caregivers. Men can do this. They can do
it, and they do do it. Some have done it very well.
But it is in us to do this, and this is the big
caregiving. We're the ones who, you know, heal the
little fusses at home and keep a neighborhood
going. And so somehow we've got to make that part of
the overall tradition that we live in. I don't
think women have to take over. That wouldn't be any
more right than men ruining the world. It would be
women ruining the world. But it's all a healing
process. The wrongs, the hurts that have been
done. And as things are healed... they blossom and
they multiply and they're good and they're better
than they were.
So I think that's what's come out of Vietnam. And,
you know, if you'd asked me all this seven years
ago,
I wouldn't have had any of this to say, I don't
think.
The thing that woke me up and started all the
Vietnam healing was the Beirut bombing. What
happened when someone was injured there, they
might be picked up within minutes, certainly
within a short time, within an hour usually. It was
very rare for somebody to be pinned down for a long
time. Usually they would pick up very soon in a
hospital.
About three days later, the folks would find out
about it. His boyfriend was killed on the 3rd of
September. The family found out on the 6th. His
body got home
on the 13th or 14th, 13th.
And when I saw the news clips about the Beirut
bombing, it went through my mind.
They're not going to know who's killed for another
three days or so. Maybe three or four days before
anyone knows. And you know, right away, well,
sometimes people don't know where their boys are
stationed. They don't know for sure if they're in a
sensitive area. But they often have an idea where
the kids will write home and say, I think we're in.
But, you know, people will know. that they've got
somebody over there, and they'll be watching and
wondering, you know, hoping against hope. And it
was just, you know, it was a short time, and they had
six people, I think, identified from the
Metroplex or this area as being in the area. And
then about the third day, they identified three
guys who had been killed. And I think it was a replay
of that old tape, for me. I hadn't thought about
that, you know, in so long as to, you know, how long
it took, but I just knew. You know, the first time I
heard about that, I thought, you know, it's going
to be three days. And then it was during that week
that all this stuff started coming
back. And another time, a couple years later, and I
broke down. I was just, I was a real mess. A couple
years later, it happened again. And at that time,
what upset me, I read a little thing, just a little
clip in a Catholic newspaper saying that Coleco
Industries planned to market a Rambo doll
complete with weapons
and accessories for They didn't call it creative
play, but something equally dumb and untrue.
And it was just like, bombs went off. How can they do
this? How can they put something like that in the
hands of children? And before that, I had really, I
think my son had one gun. I just had not bought war
toys for him. Didn't identify him as war toys, just
didn't buy these things. And then, you know, I
realized, I think that's when I realized that it
wasn't over. Things were going to, you know,
continue to happen and my boy was at risk. He was 12
at the time, you know, six years away
from me. So, I suppose, you know, something could
happen again that would trigger some, some
memory, some reaction.
I think, I think if the men who were there weren't
talking about
it, um, I think they would, if they'd open
themselves up to, uh, to healing, to
reconciliation. So many of the few guys I have
talked to, they hold themselves accountable for
things that they couldn't have been accountable
for. Those guys were young. They were 18, 19, 20
years old. In our culture, an 18 or 19-year-old is a
baby. He's not able to go out and support himself
and a family. You know, they're not making really
adult decisions.
They were there, you know, strictly
to kill or be
killed. And I had a medic tell me he had berated
himself for years because he hadn't gone after a
guy. And he was pinned down. He couldn't get out.
And by the time they got to him, the guy was dead.
There was this kid, 19 years old, who couldn't get
to somebody because, you know, he would have been
shot himself, bullets whizzing all around him.
And for years he carried that with him.
And it's so freeing when you let go of some,
not just a hurt, but something you think you did
wrong. You know, call it a sin. Or what you thought
was sinful or terrible mistake. It's so freeing
when you let
go of that. And I think we'd have a different
country. You know, you'd have more people fussing
at the government
for what they're doing in Central America. We're
paying for that now. I am paying for that.
But it's got to be real, and people have to, you
know, somehow it has to be real to them. And those
who were there and saw it, if they're not talking
about it, they might not let it be real. And there's
a whole lot of others who, you know, who haven't
seen it. It can't be real unless we make it so. And,
you know, it doesn't take everybody thinking the
same way, but it takes a certain population, a
certain number in the population When you get to a
certain number, and the rest of the people
will come around. You just got a lot of followers,
you know? Anymore? No, that's it. Thank you.